hi this video is going to talk about an
issue in veganism in the Year 2015 but
it's going to talk about it in a way
that addresses a broader and more
profound problem that's going to be with
us forever in political action of any
kind young woman who uses the name of
Swayze here on YouTube she has a very
successful channel called unnatural
vegan she's raised the issue in a couple
of different videos lately in
contrasting herself to other vegan
organizations like direct action
everywhere People for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals she's raised the
issue of how do we know the outcomes of
political action of political activism
even of advertising campaigns and this
really is a profound question even if
the answer is not that profound the
answer is we don't know unless we do
outcome evaluation research she's
mentioned in passing in a number of
different videos she picked I think an
intentionally observed example recently
when she said in passing look People for
the Ethical Treatment of Animals they
have chosen to have an advertising
campaign that protests against a video
game because a video game character
where is fur so this is a fictional
character wearing fictional fur in a
fictional universe is it effective
activism is it an effective intervention
to try to convince people that this is a
bad thing that this is a problem she
doesn't say yes or no she just looks
into the camera and says you would have
to do the research you would have to
investigate that and you're damn right
that's really the most profound answer
you can give if you don't set aside time
effort and frankly money to do elchim
evaluation research then you don't know
and governments don't know either it's
very easy for a government a charity and
NGO a group of friends involved in
political activism to convince
themselves that the outcome
of their action are identical to their
objectives I'll tell you what I mean you
have a program let's say it's a charity
working together with the government in
Cambodia I'm thinking of a real world
example that I myself did social science
research on they say hey our program
exists to help the poor and on some
level everyone who signs up to that
project is accepting the premise what
we're doing is helping the poor with no
evidence why because that's what they
signed up for that's what it says at the
top of the piece of paper this project
is to help the poor they print up little
ID cards and they all say one way or
another they have a logo that we're all
here to help the poor right does the
project actually help the poor believe
me you can have interventions in a third
world country that were intended to
alleviate poverty that actually make
poverty worse that actually result even
in the village that you were supposed to
help being abandoned the population is
reduced to zero because people give up
and flee the site because the
intervention is going so badly a really
simple example you can have a project
this was not a project I was involved in
but I did read about this you can have a
project that tries to dig wells to
provide drinking water people if you
didn't do it in a scientifically
rigorous way you dig wells and you start
pumping up water that's poisoned with
arsenic what's the real outcome with the
result some forms of outcomes you can
measure just by interviewing people many
interventions are designed to change
attitudes I did do research also another
example I did research related to HIV
and AIDS and some of those interventions
you're not directly trying to treat aids
cure AIDS help people with AIDS some of
the interventions are trying to prevent
AIDS by changing the attitudes of
certain groups in society if you don't
pay someone to go out afterwards and
interview those people and say look how
things really change what did this
project really do for you did it
actually make your situation better how
did your attitude change
sometimes it can be as simple as that as
asking people but on the other hand
people can be drinking poisoned water
water tainted with arsenic and have no
idea that's going on a project can be a
disaster in a way that requires hard
measurement you can have a project that
in theory exists to get free medical
care to poor people but the process of
how that benefit gets to the beneficiary
means that bureaucratically maybe it
ends up only helping people who are
friends of the political party that
control the process maybe it doesn't go
to the poorest of the poor because the
people you're asking to distribute the
benefit they themselves don't really
know the poorest of the poor their
government bureaucrats who sit in an
office they have certain family
connections and they don't have it in
their mandate of their schedule to go
out interview identify and help the
poorest of the poor so this youtuber
swayze has effectively put the challenge
to direct action everywhere DXE they
like to abbreviate the name but the
challenge is your activism really
effective what are the outcomes one of
the bizarre ironies here is that direct
action everywhere was founded on the
premise and the promise that what they
were going to do would be different from
any other vegan charity any other form
of environmental activism in being based
strictly on the findings of social
science research they claimed from day
one there their origin story is that
their founder and leader Wayne siong
rejected earlier methods he used as
ineffective baking cookies and handing
out free cookies didn't get results so
they were now going to form a new
organization that was results oriented
that was strictly based on this type of
social science research talking about it
didn't do it what they've ended up doing
instead is setting up an organization
with a religious belief in one method
namely disruption and their idea of
disruption includes just showing up in a
restaurant and screaming at people the
random patrons who happen to be in that
restaurant screaming slogans such as
it's not meet its violence and everyone
involved is willing to believe that the
outcomes are the same as their
objectives again that's easy to do
because that's what you signed up for
what's the attitudinal change your
supposedly achieving supposedly you're
creating an attitude of compassion where
there was no compassion before
supposedly you're sparking an awareness
of and sense of responsibility for the
murder of animals on factory farms etc
is that actually what you're doing is
that the outcome are you interviewing
any of the people coming out of that
restaurant and say oh so what did you
think what both the impacts how did this
change the way you view vegans or
veganism or animal agriculture
meat-eating or anything else the swayze
doesn't even have to put together the
whole argument here because it is so
obvious to everyone that this form of
disruptive activism that direct action
everywhere believes in so piously and
that they write so many stupid essays on
the internet defending against the
claims of the social sciences I've read
those essays it's obvious to everyone
that the main outcome of this is
antagonism and making vegans look like
idiots I do not want this video to
degenerate into a series of complaints
about everything that's wrong with DXE
direct action everywhere I made a
separate video about DXE already and it
had a lot of very interesting feedback
from both current members of the group
and former members of the group about
everything that's wrong with that
organization all right I'm going to
digress for half a second one of the
really terrible features about it is the
sense of denial denial of responsibility
for who is in charge and that anyone is
in charge the number one excuse
got from current DXE members was to
claim there is no hierarchy it's a
completely horizontal organization we're
all equal we're all grassroots nobody's
in charge of several people actually
said to me DXE is not an organization
claiming there was no organization at
all on the other hand you look at the
articles they've published in response
to certain sex scandals they had
actually had they had some accusations
of sexual harassment sexual assault and
sort of thing and that reveals not only
is there a strict hierarchy for who's in
charge and who's following orders they
also have an elaborate bureaucracy for
recording complaints but happy well
which one is it going to be guys and of
course ex-members and more cynical
disaffected members they say oh yeah
there's a hierarchy there's one guy
Wayne's Young and his girlfriend and
they are very much the leaders and
everyone else is a follower and there is
absolutely no equality and there's no
grass roots structure this is a top-down
hierarchical organization and many
people complain to me also for
understandable reasons that it is even a
cult-like organization but that is kind
of another story um one of the ways in
which I sympathize with bad activism
okay look I got to recapitulate long
story short about Swayze's comments on
this Shwayze unnatural vegan is right on
this issue she's raising an important
broad deep question it's hard to answer
but it's important again and again to
ask this question and to raise the fact
that in principle we can know the
outcomes of government programs
political action activism if we do the
research and if we don't do the research
are we just choosing to believe our own
hype or we just choose to say hey I'm
doing this to liberate the animals i'm
doing the save animals are you actually
saving even one animal what are the
statistics one of the infamous example
is a pet up people for the ethical
treatment of animals what percentage of
the pets that they help are really just
exterminated a few weeks or a few months
after taking on those are questions of
measurable outcomes
changes in attitude political changes
those can also be measured as outcomes
currently as Swayze points out direct
action everywhere only measure their
outcomes in terms of the number of
headlines they've gotten in newspapers
and on websites for CNN that sort of
thing and they don't even go so far as
to read those articles and see if the
articles are reporting them in a
positive or negative fashion and in many
cases negative because they're saying
hey this bunch of vegans are showed up
and screamed at people at a restaurant
isn't this kind of ridiculous and there
are alternatives out there I mean in
terms of questions of method one of the
groups that right now is getting a lot
of respects I think from from the
mainstream media from vegans everyone
else Toronto Pig save has really
innovated a kind of witness based
activism of just showing up and
witnessing the reality of the the meat
industry seeing the animals being taken
to slaughter and so on that's obviously
meaningful for the people doing the
activism whether or not it has any
measurable outcomes for others that's
going to be harder to establish are
their non vegans are there people in the
general public who are impacted by those
protests sadly I don't think there are
impacts for the animals themselves or
for the animal agriculture industry but
still there are things to be positively
appreciated about that form of activism
brings me back to my earlier point that
i trailed off from one of the things you
have to say in defense of bad activism
is that sometimes the beneficiaries are
the activists themselves and there's
nothing corrupt or evil about that
sometimes you set up a project in
Cambodia where the real point is not to
help the poor you say you're helping the
poor but maybe the point is to get
volunteers who are wealthy western
university students in California and
put them on a plane and give them the
experience of living in poverty in
Cambodia maybe that's the real point of
the project now if you're honest with
yourself about it that's okay that could
be a great project you could be getting
kids out of the classroom in California
and giving them two months in a village
on a mountain where there's no clean
drinking water and that's a really
meaningful and educational experience
and in some sense it changes the world
it changes attitudes um but of course if
you're claiming that by doing this
you're actually transforming the village
in Cambodia and you're helping the poor
people will go ahead and prove it right
with vegan activism are you actually
helping animals are you changing the
minds of people who are not vegan or are
you just providing an experience that's
meaningful for the activists themselves
so the people who already are vegan for
the people who go to the village so to
speak in terms of the P thoughts behind
the direct action if we're protests
that's a lot of what I see I see people
who are angry and who want to feel
powerful instead of powerless I see
people who want to scream in the face of
public and difference and another big
aspect of direct action everyone their
appeal is that they provide community in
quotation marks to people who are
isolated alone angry crest foam with the
world so by going to these events and
participating disruption this is part of
what some people complain his coat like
these vegans get to meet and form bonds
with other vegans who themselves are
outraged or feel they have to publicly
express their outrage and so on so it's
hard to make a neutral statement about
this what's the point of the project are
you trying to just feel better about
yourself are you trying to just put
together a gang of friends are you
trying to change the world are you
trying to save animals are you really
trying to educate the public as with
campaigns to get people to quit smoking
cigarettes
I think one of the easiest way is to
think of vegan political activism is
just that we're trying to educate people
to quit eating meat and when you put it
that way as a process of public
education I think it becomes very clear
that we're not going to achieve those
ends by just screaming at people and
restaurants but just carrying out
disruption how you can carry it out
would be a much longer video but hey
thanks to Swayze over at a natural vegan
she's made several videos that I
personally disagree with on issues I
think she's wrong about but on this
particular issue i agree with her and I
appreciate her for raising it again and
again I hope she keeps asking those
questions and on a fundamental level I'm
a fan of anyone who takes the time to
pick up the microphone to raise
important political and philosophical
questions about veganism or otherwise
instead of say putting on a bikini
playing beach volleyball and trying to
sell diet books for how you too can look
right in a bikini not that one is going
to replace the other we're not going to
replace bikini videos with politics and
philosophy videos here people no we're
not but we need both all right and in
terms of the online presence of veganism
I'm delighted to see anyone doing
something with more substance than
bouncing in bikinis